How did you feel when those first students arrived?
Well, I think that we were elated.
We had been without students, and that's certainly true.
I'm speaking for myself now, maybe.
I had been without students and was without a classroom for two years, and I really felt that.
I was delighted.
I had to wait for another year before I had those students, though, because microbiology was the second year, of course.
This is the fall of 77.
Students were admitted in the fall of 77.
And surely there were some stories you can recall about the beginning.
What were the first weeks like?
I remember the welcoming address that Jim Knight gave to that charter class.
I also remember that one month later, he departed College Station to return to New Orleans, resigned the deanship, and that was a very hurtful time, I think, for all of us.
Who had put all of our, to use a trite phrase, all of our eggs in this basket.
Were you all aware of any advance news of that?
I don't know when we had an inkling that that was about to happen.
The rumor circulating was that
Dr. Knight's wife, Sally, was unhappy in College Station.
She had not adapted well to life in a small town.
She was born and raised in New Orleans and missed New Orleans, and that the principal reason for his resigning was to get her back to her home.
I have become quite close friends with Sally, and she denies that that was ever the case, but that was the common rumor at the time.
Do you feel comfortable in saying what you think the real cause of his departure was?
Or do you feel comfortable?
I don't know that.
I never talked about it with Jim.
All right, who then stepped in to be the interim dean?
The interim dean, acting dean, I think it was his title, was Alvin Smith, who Jim had chosen to be his associate dean almost from the very beginning.
And Alvin was in that position for approximately a year.
Maybe it was a little bit shorter than that.
I can't remember.
And Dr. Calhoun took the initiative in
searching for a new dean.
Lee Prescott?
No, I think I remember quite well visiting John Calhoun summoned all of those of us who were in residence to a meeting at the old Ramada Inn and announced that he was taking the helm on the search for a new dean and eventually the person was identified as
Robert Stone, who joined our faculty then and as dean in summer of 78, I believe it was.
He was the dean at Oregon.
Yes.
How did you all persuade him to come here?
The story I have, and I think Bob pretty well has confirmed this with me, he said that his greatest happiness in academe has always been in his association with new programs that we're building up.
And that was true in New Mexico.
It was true in California.
And he got to Oregon and it was a tradition-bound school and he just couldn't adapt very well.
That's exactly what he told me on tape two weeks ago.
You're almost quoting me.
Describe his leadership style.
He was a very strong individual, very strong feelings, very opinionated about many things.
But he knew medical education and he knew what it took to get this new medical school on the right track.
He took the helm and he just ran with it.
He did everything that was necessary.
Did you medical faculty members feel comparatively positive when he got here?
Oh, yes.
Very much so.
You had students by that second year.
Yes.
Describe the teaching of some of those first Aggie medical students.
Oh, my.
I met my first medical class in the sub-basement of Teague in a small classroom that was part of the space assigned to us.
a group of shining faces, including such luminaries as now Regent Sue Rudd, Sue Rudd Wynne, as she is now named, Mark Cecilio, and we have a number of other members of that charter class now on the senior staff at Scott & White, including
Keller Matthews, who was an anesthesiologist at Scott & White and was formerly an assistant or associate dean for student affairs in Temple.
John Hodges is on the senior staff at Scott & White in Temple.
There are three or four others.
At the time that those students were in your class, that first year or two, how did you feel their ability compared with medical students you had known elsewhere?
Oh, I think that we were very successful in taking the cream.
All of these students in the first several classes had completed only two years toward a baccalaureate degree.
They were not, therefore, eligible for admission to most other medical programs, either in Texas or in the country, and we took the cream of the crop.
This was an exceedingly special group of students for the first several years, and we had stellar performers.
Generally, where had they done their first two years?
They were all Aggies.
Oh, they were all from...
And surely for you as a non-Aggie before this, surely there must have been some learning experiences you had of what it was like.
Oh, yes.
I learned about the Corps of Cadets in very intimate terms.
I learned such things as what CT means, for example.
Oh, yes.
Did they attempt any jokes on, any Aggie jokes or pranks?
I can't remember anything specifically.
Let's see.
What were you, what special role did you hope to play with these students?
What was going to be special about this medical school?
I think that we agreed with Bob Stone's stated philosophy that we were going to be rather elitist in the kindest sense of that word.
This would be a special program with a special kind of relationship existing between faculty and a very small number of students.
we would foster interactive skills, perhaps to a greater degree than could exist in a medical school where there are 200 in a class.
We were going to be small and special.
And I think that fit very nicely with Jim Knight's stated mission for the school, too.
I mean, he was absolutely committed that this was going to be a medical program heavy on the humanistic side.
And we tried to foster that particular view.
Now, didn't it begin also with a comparatively close relationship between the first-year medical students and local practitioners also?
Yes.
Right from the start, we placed these students in the offices of practicing physicians within about a 30-mile radius of Colley Station for one afternoon a week.
The so-called precept program, that program still exists today, and students right from the start are placed with practicing physicians to get an upfront view of office practice.
Among those local practitioners in the region, which ones would you thank most for their cooperation and assistance in that program?
Oh, I think that O.C.
Cooper deserves a tip of the hat, certainly.
Harry Lipscomb was another.
Dr. Phil Davis, still another.
No, there are a fair number.
Lamar McNew was one of the very early ones.
He still is very intimately involved with our program.
The original program was two years and then admitted to medical school.
Did they gradually move up to three or four years before?
Yes, and Haskell, I don't remember when that change came about.
I think that it was the perception of
many of the faculty that the charter class and a couple of classes that succeeded the charter class, while these were people with great intellect, they were
relatively immature and perhaps too immature at the tender age of 22 to be seeing patients.
And it was then decided that maybe we did make a mistake in cutting two years off the baccalaureate program, that we should give our students a chance to grow up before putting them in the clinical setting.
When they describe the arrangements as far as you know, when the first group got to Temple for their third and fourth years, describe the arrangements up there.
Well, I'm just guessing now, but I assume that the apartments set on the grounds of the VA hospital had already been completed, so students basically had subsidized housing on the grounds of a hospital.
These were apartments constructed out of some vacated excess space, as it was perceived by the Veterans Administration.
I think the project was financed maybe wholly
by funds from the T. Grantston grant to the university.
There were apartments together with a student center, we called it the Student Union, right on the edge of the VA grounds in Temple.
And they began to do their work at both Scott and White and the Veterans.
Yes, that's correct.
What were the advantages of having those two different experiences?
Oh, well, certainly a vast difference in patient clientele.
I mean, Scott and White, a full gamut of
Patients, a tertiary care hospital, a very large walk-in clinic, but catering to a wide range of medical kinds of issues from OB-GYN all the way to geriatric medical care.
The VA was a little bit different because it was basically all male and principally geriatric medicine.
I used to tell our son, Mark, that on the one side, creative, new, innovative, and so forth.
Over here, routine, boring, old man, lungs, heart, joints, and so forth.
Scott and White had a disadvantage, however, in that it was a tertiary care reference hospital and therefore had a fair share of the extraordinary, unusual kinds of things.
I believe that we were well served when we developed, some years later, an affiliation with Darnell Army Hospital at Fort Hood because there we were dealing with a patient population that was basically normal and with an occasional medical problem.
And that relation continues.
And that continues.
So then really three now.
Yes.
Well, actually it's more than that because recently we pulled into the fold with a formal affiliation Driscoll Children's Hospital in Corpus Christi.
And so our students on the pediatric service do receive a portion of their pediatric training at Driscoll.
The facilities that you and your colleagues in your department had started out in the Teague building, when did you get some new facilities?
Where were they?
Well, I remember that only too well.
I did have, by 1978 or 79, I had four faculty members.
Those four faculty members were absolutely intent on keeping their research careers alive, and there wasn't adequate space in the Teague building for that to happen.
I can well remember that at one point with these four faculty members, I had space assigned to the department in six different buildings, including the old heat building on the central campus, in the basement of the Boyle Health Center,
We had a laboratory that was borrowed from the vets somewhere here in
out here on the farm.
And we were all, most of us were officed by that time in the petroleum engineering building.
So it was a challenge.
I never did get my faculty under a single roof until we moved into this building, the Reynolds Building in 1983.
How did this building get planned, the Reynolds Building?
Was there good faculty participation?
Good input?
Oh yes, I think that we did have superb faculty input into the design of this building.
There were content, it was a contentious issue, however, as to how much money would be committed to the construction of a building to support the basic science faculty.
I know that
Dr. Calhoun and Dr. Knight had a series of exchanges on that particular issue.
No one really knew where to begin because we started with a class of 32.
We were told, however, to plan a building, design a building for three or four times that number in the event that we would grow.
We all thought we might grow some, and so this building, at least the teaching space in this building, was designed for a maximum class of 125.
We are now up to a class of 64, having been in the building for 17 years already, so that the teaching space in this building was over-designed.
Most of the teaching laboratories have now been taken over and redesigned for research support.
And they moved into this building in the summer of 1983.
What was the feeling of, what was the response as people moved in?
Well, it was just totally remarkable.
My faculty, for the
A couple of years prior to that, at least three of the four of us were in fact housed in the old Creamery Building, which no longer exists.
It was right at the entrance to the West Campus, so-called.
It was a wonderful building, and three of us had offices and labs in that building until we were able to move into this one.
We had designed our space to be on the fourth floor of this building,
When time came for move-in, I made the pitch that it would be best to start with the move-in to the top floor and work down from there, and that's exactly what happened.
So my department was essentially the first occupant of this building, and that was a very exciting time.
By that time, your department had about how many people in it?
At that time, we had five.
Describe for me your role at that time as department chairman and as a faculty member.
What were you teaching and what was your routine like?
Better turn it off.
I need to think about this a minute.
My title was department head, and therefore I had responsibility for the nurturing of a small department, the design of a teaching program adequate to that discipline.
That would be a responsible educational experience for students to achieve competencies in medical microbiology for purposes of licensure eventually.
I, before the department moved into this building, space was of such a limited character that I sacrificed my own research program in the interest of my faculty, turning over all the research space that became available to us to them, who were up and coming, all of them assistant professors who needed to work on the development of their professional life.
But as a department head, in addition to managing the affairs of the department, I had a number of other responsibilities with development.
I sat on virtually all of the college committees.
I sat on a fair number of university committees including the university's curriculum committee representing the interests of the college of medicine the new college of medicine which incidentally came as a title for this program replacing program in medicine about the same time that
we graduated our first class.
I don't know the exact timing of that, but we did appeal to the coordinating board to designate our departments as official departments and the program as an official college of Texas A&M University.
And did everyone feel good about that?
Oh, yes, indeed.
Organizational pattern.
In fact, we felt very good about it.
There's one other point I left out.
I did say earlier that I told the faculty I was recruiting that this was a relatively high risk opportunity, but one that they couldn't afford to miss.
But what I didn't say was that when I took a job here,
I was required to give up my tenure that I had earned at Michigan State to come also to a high-risk program, and that was a pretty daring move for me and my young family, but I did it, and it worked out okay.
And I regained my tenure, and I worked very hard with my faculty to have them ultimately earn their tenure too.
Who are the other campus people of whatever status who, in those early years, who were strongly supportive of medicine?
Who else deserves a pat on the back for helping medicine start off well?
We had a fair number of contacts in the College of Veterinary Medicine.
George Shelton was a highly supportive individual.
And JD McCready, I remember well from the vet school, who was very, very supportive.
Dick Seed from the College of Science, head of the Department of Biology at that time, was very, very supportive.
We had some support in the Department of Biochemistry, Professor Landman, I remember well.
Wendell Landman.
Wendell Landman, who was very supportive and in fact yielded some space in the heat building to support the laboratory activities of the Eilers when they first came on this campus in, I think, 1978.
Do you remember across the state any observers who were predictors of doom?
Any people at other places that said it'll never work?
Well, we heard rumors about that, but I never heard any specific names attached to those rumors, so I really can't respond.
Came into this new facility.
Did it change what you as the department chairman were doing?
Oh, indeed it did, because I was able to claim some space for a laboratory to get back into research, and I did, in fact.
Describe what you were doing, what you started redoing.
Well, I thought that my research career could be put back together again by developing a specific application in electron microscopy called freeze etching.
freeze etch specimens and examination for electron microscopy of the microbial world.
And there was very little work published in the literature at that time.
So part of my getting back into the laboratory was indeed to build a freeze etch laboratory with the necessary machinery.
freeze etch, F-R-E-E-Z-E dash E-T-C-H.
It simply is a process by which a specimen is deep frozen at the temperature of liquid nitrogen, subjected to a fracturing in the cold in some appropriate way.
The fractured surface is replicated in atomic carbon, and then the replica is examined under the electron microscope.
And it is a technique that I had gone to Switzerland to learn some years before and its application to microbiology.
Where did you get the support, financial support?
Well, we had a very nice grant as part of the budget from the state when we moved into this building for equipment.
And so the equipment for that laboratory came through state support directly.
And how long did you stay with that task?
Well, for several years, until I got overwhelmed with other kinds of administrative tasks, including the development of a faculty senate, the development of a faculty club, and a number of other, and moving into the dean's office.
Right, but you're also, when you said Faculty Senate and Faculty Club, you're talking about campus-wide.
Campus.
Discuss how, what your role was in each.
Well, my good friend and colleague, John McDermott, was the main character involved with the development of a Faculty Senate.
In the 100th year of this university, it was felt that it was long overdue to have a Faculty Senate, and we worked very hard, and I identified myself to John McDermott as a representative from the College of Medicine
to develop a university-wide Faculty Senate.
And who, at the administrative level, who approved that?
Who supported that, the creation of the Senate?
Well, I think that it came at the right time.
Frank Vandiver was one of the key supporters early on, and he is the one, in fact, who carried it to the Board of Regents for eventual approval.
All right, then the Faculty Club.
The Faculty Club.
My understanding is that the 11th floor of the Rudder Tower was originally designed as a faculty club.
Never became one, for reasons that have never been fully explained to me.
It became a public restaurant, one that was losing a fair amount of money, as I recall.
We made an appeal again to Frank Vandiver to reclaim that space as a closed faculty club, and that's exactly what happened.
And I became the first elected president of the board of directors of that faculty club.
Describe what that was like.
It's just that I believed so strongly that this campus needed a place for faculty to demonstrate a kind of cohesiveness, a place to socialize, to exchange.
I think it did much, in my view, it should do some of the things that a faculty senate could do by bringing people from various disparate disciplines together.
And I think that it was a complementary activity to what I was seeing happening in the Faculty Senate.
And then some of my best friendships evolved through the Faculty Senate, which would never have taken place without such a body.
How long were you active in those two efforts?
Oh, gee.
I held all elected offices of the Faculty Senate, including Speaker, in the fourth year of its existence.
I guess my original term in the Senate was a five- or six-year thing, and I met that.
I was active on the board of directors of the Faculty Club for about the same length of time, I believe.
What were the major topics y'all dealt with that you remember on the Faculty Senate?
Well, I think that my fellow senators thought that perhaps our first major accomplishment was the elimination of final exams being optional for seniors, graduating seniors.
When I first got here as a newcomer, I thought that, too.
I now think it was a good idea for graduating seniors.
That's pretty funny.
To graduate them, get them gone, get them out of here, and we'll deal with the others.
What other topics?
There must have been some things lasting longer than that.
Oh, yeah.
Well, the one that I became most intimately involved with was the charter speaker, John McDermott, asked me to chair a committee to look at the feasibility of a university-wide core curriculum for undergraduates.
And not only did we decide that it was feasible, but it was essential.
And after about a year of meetings, very intensive meetings, that committee did report to the Faculty Senate the design of a core curriculum that was passed by the full Senate almost intact.
that went to Frank Vandiver, then president, and was ultimately approved by the board.
And indeed, I'm really happy to say that probably served as the model for a statewide requirement for a core curriculum in all state universities.
All right, so in the 80s, you began to be a campus active faculty member.
Yes, indeed.
Were you, in the medical faculty, was that unusual?
Were you almost one of a kind?
Yeah, I guess I was almost one of a kind, but that's why I came to A&M.
I've always considered myself a university kind of person.
It is why I left Baylor College of Medicine in 1971 to go to Michigan State, because I missed the environment of a full university campus.
I became a very strong activist at Michigan State, campus-wide, though serving the interests of the two colleges of medicine at Michigan State, both the College of Human Medicine and the College of Osteopathic Medicine.
I taught in both.
And that's...
I had a need to do that.
I felt that same need continuing when I came here.
And so I really did become a university.
Why do you feel there is, what do you think the advantages are of the medical program being part of a real university?
Oh, I have a very strong feeling about that.
I think that
There are so many opportunities, intellectual opportunities, that exist in a full university setting.
I think medical faculty tend to deal too much in isolation.
They cut themselves off from the intellectual life that is possible, and that a full university offers just absolutely boundless opportunities
for that to happen.
Can you give some examples to prove that here?
Well, I'm not sure I know how to answer that question directly, but I do have some very strong feelings about our present situation.
But in your own, can you give some examples of your own experience of where you had the blessing of working with people outside of medicine?
Well, Haskell, you may not remember this, but in 1976,